JMU NACO App is a webform and XQuery database for creating and processing MARC 21 authority files for eventual upload to Library of Congress NAF.  The animus behind it holds that faculty members at James Madison University, with help from JMU Libraries, can input the basic information necessary to create RDA authority records for themselves.  This information will be vetted by JMU NACO-certified staff according to approved NACO standards before they are distributed to LCNAF.  The application runs on the open source XML database eXist-db (v. 2.X) and can be installed as a compiled EXPath XAR package.  The webform uses the W3C XForms standard and the XSLTForms implementation in eXist-db.  External authentication is handled through the the insitutional VPN and the creation of eXist user accounts.  Uploading of existing MARC authority records, or creation de novo, using eXist’s eXide or an external XML editor, requires an administrative login.

The application can upload MARCXML authority records or collections that have been downloaded & converted from OCLC Connexion, or “skeletal” authority files can be created using the XForms GUI (jmunaco/index.html).  The primary XForms input form (jmunaco/form.html) solicits the preferred form of name (100), fuller form(s) of name (400), birthyear (046 $f in edtf format), and place of residence (370 $e).  A picklist of JMU Department names will load the NACO authorized access points, with optional start and end dates (373).  Other institutional affiliations can be added (373).  Languages of expression (377 picklist), fields of activity (372) and primary occupations (374) can be added.  Places of academic employment can be added (510 2_). Citations with the author’s name corresponding to his or her preferred form can be added as 670 $a$b entries.  If a birth year is entered, the value is added to a subfield d in the 100 and 400s, if present, in addition to the 046 subfield f.  If a MARCXML record is imported into the system with 100 subfield q, a 378 is generated. If an ORCiD, VIAF or ISNI identifier is entered into an 024 with a subfield 2, a corresponding 024 is generated with an actionable URL, with subfield 2 "uri" value.

By default, the form generates an 040 with ViHarT, 670 $a “private communication from author , [datestamp]: $b (online submission form [preferred from of name in direct form, variant names, employed by, birth year ])” and a 510 $w r $i Employer: $a James Madison University. The 370, 372, 373, 374 fileds, if present, add a boilderplate subfield v source declaration "JMU NACO Online Submission Form,[month-name day, yyyy]". The enduser instructions include “hints” and a jpeg example of a fully populated JMU authority webform. 

In order to assist the NACO staff in their work, supplementary information (“If you feel there is additional information that we need for your authority record that the online form fails to cover, including additional researcher identifiers, please tell us here”) can be saved to a 987.

A number of XQuery database scripts have been developed for MARCXML editing and drastic directory housekeeping.

Among the “value added” steps that the NACO staff must take before completing a name authority record in this workflow is converting the user-submitted text in the 372 and 374 to LCSH or other approved controlled vocabularies, converting non-JMU 373s to LCNAF, adjusting the 670 entries to match NACO standards, and deciding whether fuller forms of the name warrant a 378 or the default 400.  

If a new skeletal record is created, the form supports entry of ORCiD, VIAF or ISNI identifiers by admin, although the enduser form encourages the faculty to create and enter an ORCiD ID.  Access to the file by the faculty member is controlled by a MARC 988, authenticating against the JMU E-ID in the subfield “a” and password in subfield “b”, which are stripped out upon export.

Both the XForm html file and the XQuery scripts that convert the form data into MARCXML records can be improved in many ways!  Any institution wishing to hack this application for local use will need to pay rapt attention to the files form.html, user-edit.xql, and user-save.xql, among others.

The core application was created by LightCastle Technical Consulting (Staunton VA), and is under active development by James Madison University Libraries and Educational Technologies.  These files are released under an Apache 2.0 License.    
